What can we do for the same organizational behavior?
How to improve it? How to optimize it?
How to achieve the desired results for us as business owners?
Here you can identify several different approaches,
but we will focus on two main areas
that are used in business in the modern world.
These are behavioral and cognitive approaches.
As we have already said, these approaches emerged in the last century.
The behavioral approach emerged at the beginning of the last century,
and the cognitive approach emerged somewhere in the 1960s.
These approaches have already proven themselves as effective tools
that give us the operational opportunity to achieve the desired result.
We can apply them in practice.
Let's see what these approaches are and how they can be useful to us.
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that our goal now is not to learn
how to use the relevant topics and methods.
Our goal is to get acquainted with these methods.
As for the specific application and practice,
this is a separate conversation, and this conversation will be devoted to the further topics of our course.
Traditionally, the behavioral approach,
which was introduced in 1911,
is associated with the name of John Watson,
and is associated with the problem of the development and formation of a person's certain skills and certain reactions.
John Watson set the task of the behavioral approach.
He said that we can see a person's behavior,
we can see what he does well, what he does badly,
what needs to be improved in order to achieve the best result,
how to influence a person so that there are no corresponding results.
There is a system of encouraging positive behavior and punishing or sanctioning undesirable behavior.
These are some incentives that are present in the environment.
We can influence a person.
We can influence a person with these incentives.
These can be painful sensations,
these can be some desired motivation incentives,
such as a raise in salary, career growth, participation in the company's activities, options, and so on.
In order to get the desired reaction,
loyalty of a person,
in the application business, of course, we consider the loyalty of a person,
his greater involvement in the activity,
greater self-reliance,
his interest in obtaining certain results.
The main basic formula that is present in behaviorism and was formulated by Watson in 1911 is the stimulus-reaction formula.
We can influence a person with external stimuli.
The influence of these external stimuli leads to a certain reaction of a person to these stimuli.
The reaction is that he starts doing something, he stops doing something, he increases something, accelerates something, prevents something.
Therefore, if we select the appropriate stimuli, we will be able to get the desired reactions.
John Watson said,
Give me a child and tell me who he should be.
And then I will make sure that you get the desired result.
This idea turned out to be very useful, very interesting, and very demanding.
Behaviorism started its victorious march, both in science and, accordingly,
it found a variety of applications,
applicable to people, to organizational behavior of people in organizations.
We will not consider the whole history of behaviorism,
but will focus on the results of the classic of this approach by Boris Friedrich Skinner,
an outstanding American psychologist,
who had a decisive influence on the whole organizational behavior,
on the whole system of development of certain skills, certain reactions,
under the influence of external stimuli.
Skinner is, in fact, a continuer and developer of Watson's ideas,
and the main difference is that Skinner divided the so-called respondent behavior and operant behavior.
Respondent behavior is the reaction of the body to external stimuli.
A classic example is Pavlov's experiment.
We take a dog, show it food, and saliva starts to come out.
This is respondent behavior, a reaction to some external stimulus that is presented.
If saliva is presented, it comes out. If it is not presented, saliva is not produced.
For a long time, respondent behavior was the main subject of study of psychology,
and, accordingly, when these results were applied to organizational behavior,
this respondent scheme was also built there.
You want to earn more, so you make more products.
Here is the stimulus of the reaction. The more products, the more you earn.
There is a stimulus that leads to the desired reaction.
And until the middle of the 20th century, respondent behavior was mainly studied.
Skinner also started with this.
However, Skinner noticed that in fact, in addition to respondent behavior,
when there is a pure reaction to external stimuli, there is another type of behavior.
A person does something, and as a result of what he does, there are consequences of behavior.
If a person works successfully, then it is rewarded with bonuses, promotion to the service.
A person may not think that he works to get a promotion to the service.
However, his work was rewarded with some stimulus.
Here, the consequences of behavior are the main thing.
And the behavior that is characterized by the results that it eventually gets,
Skinner called operant behavior, which is based on certain actions.
An animal, a person, performs certain actions and gets the consequences of this action.
After I got the consequences of the action, if I like these consequences,
I will repeat, improve, modify the behavior that caused these consequences.
If I don't like the results I got, I won't repeat this behavior, and, accordingly, this behavior will disappear.
If, for example, at every place of work I constantly begin to defend my rights,
require adequate assessment of me as a specialist,
then it will be very often due to the fact that I will look for new and new places of work.
This is not a satisfactory result for me, and, accordingly, such a kind of behavior in a normal person
will lead to the fact that he will gradually modify his behavior and stop insisting on his rights.
Then he will get some satisfactory results and will consolidate them.
This is a very simple idea that Skinner talked about, but this idea was really revolutionary.
In this case, I will not constantly think about what stimuli to apply.
I will think about the consequences of this or that behavior,
and cultivate, develop the behavior that leads to the consequences that suit and interest me.
Therefore, if we are talking about an organization, and the head of the organization sets certain goals for it,
then it is necessary to calculate the consequences that will be associated with certain behavior,
and make an effort to form, accelerate, strengthen the desired behavior with the desired consequences,
and at the same time avoid behavior that will go against the goals that are set.
This idea turned out to be very fruitful, and for a long time the analysis of operant organizational behavior
played a significant role in the entire theory of organization.
Scientific organization, labor, and theory of theory of organization are also largely based on these behavioral ideas.
As for Skinner, he is worthy of praise for this direction and this study.
However, Skinner himself was also a great pragmatist.
Having developed a new approach to training, different from the classic Pavlov's conditioning,
Skinner began to develop training technology, because Skinner noted that in fact it is not enough to be able to set a goal,
it is not enough to be able to build an incentive to get the desired reaction.
In order for us to get the desired results in business, education, and education,
we need to create behavior technology.
That is, the methods of training, the methods of education that will lead to the desired results.
As for Boris Skinner, he was the developer and the founder of such a well-known training method as programmed training.
He came to this training from his experience.
Once he was invited to a math lesson that was conducted by his daughter.
In America, it was customary for parents to attend lessons to assess the behavior of children and their relationship with teachers.
Skinner, sitting in this lesson, suddenly discovered that everything that the teacher did was in line with all the knowledge of behavior that was known.
These were bifurcated knowledge.
Accordingly, the teacher did not do anything to reinforce the desired reactions, did not deal with the problem of avoiding undesirable reactions.
The teacher was on his own, the children were on their own.
This is a very common situation that we can encounter now, not only in school, but also in universities.
Skinner thought, well, before that, all Skinner's experiments were carried out on animals.
He loved pigeons very much, and all experiments on the development of operant behavior were carried out on pigeons.
Skinner thought, we can do telegraphic actions on animals, but can't we apply these actions to humans?
Here is a very important bifurcated idea that there is no fundamental difference between animals and humans in terms of the development of desirable behavior.
Therefore, Skinner thought about how to apply all this data to learning.
He did not have to invent anything new, because, in fact, the idea of ​​programmed learning had already been formed in him.
Programmed learning is a modification of operant behavior.
Very often, bifurcation accuses that all methods of animal training are transferred to people.
You can treat this accusation in different ways.
But on the other hand, what does any leader want?
Any leader wants employees to quickly get to work and do exactly what is required of them.
In fact, this is the situation in the development of the attachment of desired skills.
It was obvious to Skinner.
In this regard, he simply transferred the idea of ​​operant behavior to programmed learning.
As for programmed learning, Skinner developed it in two aspects.
The first aspect is, of course, the training of children.
But the second aspect was the training of professional skills.
Because Skinner's work was in the middle of the last century.
The middle of the last century was characterized by the fact that a large number of people, after the Great Patriotic War, returned to peaceful labor.
And they had to learn a new skill, which, of course, they did not have.
Learning this skill had to be fast, so that the organization of the company quickly received profit, invested funds and quickly received results from this investment.
In this regard, Skinner formulated four programming skills that he transferred from his own research into the conditioning of operant behavior.
The first requirement was that there should be a constant exchange between the learner and his teacher.
It should not be the case that the teacher tells something about himself, and the student does something about himself.
Both are satisfied. They do not interfere with each other, everyone does his own thing.
If I want a person to learn what I teach him as quickly as possible, to get the necessary skills, when we talk about learning from the point of view of behaviorism, we are talking about developing skills.
Skinner was not fundamentally engaged in mental processes.
We'll talk about this a little later, when we move on to cognitive behavior theory.
Skinner was interested in behavioral skills.
A person learns to do something with his hands, legs.
These are behavioral skills.
If I want to get the desired result from a person quickly, I need to ensure a feedback between the learner and the teacher.
The teacher should see how correctly the skill is formed and correct the formation of this skill.
The learner should understand what he is getting, where he has questions, what needs to be clarified from the bearer of this skill, the teacher who teaches him.
It seems to be a simple idea, but it turned out to be very fruitful.
On the other hand, it may have been strange for teachers in the mid-50s of the last century.
For behavioral psychologists, it was a natural idea.
It was an idea of reinforcement and punishment, which constantly functioned from the point of view of animal work.
The next element of programmable learning was developed by Skinner.
These were not some kind of interrelated skills.
It was an operational description of how to build effective learning.
Operational, as you remember, is a list of procedures for obtaining the desired skills.
As for the second element, Skinner stated the following.
We must break the complex skill into elementary components.
And having broken them into elementary components, we must work out each of these components to the full automation.
A person must learn to make micro-movements, micro-skills.
And then, having made these micro-movements, he will get the final result.
As for the research of Skinner, he mainly worked with operators, dispatchers.
And here the task of automatic response to the symbols they receive was very important.
To the data that the radar gives, to the data that is obtained as a result.
But, of course, the same results of breaking the complex skill into component parts and processing elementary components into a whole skill
can be transferred to all other factors of learning.
Starting with school and ending with the skill of training professional behavior.
The skill of developing professional competences.
And Skinner here again drew attention to the fact that in no case should you make jumps.
Everything that suffers in the modern education system.
Until a person has mastered the previous micro-skill, it is not worth moving on to the next one.
Everything must be done consistently.
This will be due to the fact that we will strengthen the skills that we develop and what we receive.
The next element of programmed learning that Skinner considered is that
each student should be able to reproduce the skill that we teach him.
Again, a very simple situation.
If a child who learns to write is not able to control his subtle motor skills with his fingers,
then no matter how much we demand, he will not learn to write calligraphy handwriting.
Just because he does not have a subtle motor skill yet.
And in order for this motor skill to develop, we need to do certain exercises to develop these muscles.
Thus, any person can be taught only by those actions, only by the skill to which he is ready, which he is able to perform.
You can't get what he hasn't formed and agreed on yet.
The last element of programmed learning that Skinner introduces is the role of a mentor.
Skinner talked about teachers, of course, but today we can talk about mentors, about coaches.
The role of a mentor is to consistently bring the teacher to the correct answer by prompting, reminding, hinting, choosing an answer.
We all have encountered programmed learning, it usually happens in the test results that we pass, the test with the choice of an answer.
This is what programmed learning is.
We choose the correct answer, and depending on what we have chosen, we get knowledge about whether we have mastered the material correctly or not.
If we have mastered it correctly, we switch to a different level of learning.
If we have mastered it incorrectly, we repeat the material until we get the right answer.
What are all these credit events that take place during the MBA course?
We take part in a certain course, a certain component.
It is pointless to study strategic planning if we have not studied the basic methodological approaches to its formation.
Therefore, in order to get a stable skill, we need to have a strategy of behavior set up step by step.
The role of a mentor is to control the level of learning we are at, whether we are ready to move on to the next step,
or we need to stop and refine, refine the material that we have now.
This is the idea of programmed learning.
It was formed by Skinner in the middle of the last century.
Moreover, since then, almost without any changes, the idea of programmed learning has firmly entered the educational technology.
Then it began to enter the technology of professional skills, professional competencies.
A huge number of trainings that exist, which many of us have taken part in, are behavioral training.
We develop the necessary skills.
There are, of course, some disadvantages, which we will talk about a little later when we talk about cognitive learning.
Because here our attitude to what we study is not taken into account, not our desire.
We go through training and we get a skill.
Did we understand anything?
It doesn't matter anymore.
The main thing is that we have developed a skill.
It is not always useful, but from the point of view of pragmatics, it works quickly.
What interests the leader?
The leader is interested in making the employee quickly learn to perform the required actions.
Come to work on time, submit a report on time, do certain actions on time.
What is included in the competencies of time managing, which will also be considered in our course a little later.
So, this is the idea of ​​programmed learning, which was proposed and implemented by Skinner.
It was implemented because when we talk about Skinner, we are talking about a person who did not just give some ideas for other people to do their applications.
Skinner worked on each of his ideas in practice.
That is why, despite the fact that bichlorism dates back to the beginning of the last century, despite the fact that Skinner himself died in 1990,
his ideas, his concepts, his approaches live, develop and are very popular.
Of course, not all skills can be developed this way.
But if we talk about simple skills, bichloral approaches have no substitutes in terms of efficiency and speed.
Again, as for Skinner, it should be noted that Skinner was practically the first person, the first researcher, the first scientist,
who asked questions about behavior technologies.
It's not a question of what behavior is, how it is implemented, but precisely about the technology.
What paths, what steps, what stages, what steps are necessary to implement, through which steps a person must be conducted in order to develop the desired, required skill.
And this idea of Skinner was widely recognized and then found a huge number of implementations in various of his manifestations.
Naturally, these ideas did not stop there and got their further development.
And as for this development, I think we should now talk about the approach of Edward Tolman.
Again, we will consider, as agreed, those approaches that are applicable in our business practice,
which are not a scientific interest, but what has a pragmatic outcome,
that is, what is an investment that justifies itself.
Very often, all behaviorists, and Skinner above all, were accused of not paying attention to the difference between a human and an animal.
And what a person is proud of, his intellect, thinking, fall out of all these approaches, including the very same programming education.
What do we use? We use memory and we use skill development.
Well, the worm can be taught this, and these experiments were made back in the 19th century, when the worms were taught to find the right way out.
Still, if we are talking about a human, then we should not forget that a human is a homo sapiens sapiens, a reasonable person.
And, accordingly, it is possible, of course, and this is undisputed, and behaviorists have clearly proven this, based on the method of stimulus,
the reaction to achieve the desired result from a human.
But can this process be accelerated?
I am again drawing your attention to the process, I am talking about acceleration.
You can get the necessary knowledge and education, as we received, after spending 5-6 years in one university, someone received a second higher education.
And then, as the studies show, the same statistics, that of all the information that we receive in the university, in our life, in professional activity, we use no more than 10-15%.
So why should we spend 5 years learning information, from which we will use only the 7th part?
Behaviorists solved this problem by working out the skill, which they were accused of using in training.
Tolman was also a behaviorist, and also a supporter of the behavioral approach.
However, Tolman thought about other issues.
Indeed, there is a stimulus, there is a reaction, there are undisputed results, and there is a quick achievement of this result.
Can this process be accelerated?
Tolman moved away from the tradition of behaviorism and drew attention to the following circumstances.
Indeed, both stimulus and reaction are measurable, verifiable, and fast-proceduring.
Nevertheless, there is another series of variables that can accelerate the process of transition from stimulus to desired reaction.
Tolman, as a behaviorist, conducted his experiments on rats.
And Tolman came to the conclusion that there are also intermediate variables.
There is another variable between stimulus and reaction, the so-called intermediate variables, which are our cognitive and cognitive processes.
The stimulus that affects us does not directly lead to a certain behavior.
This is not a situation when we are pricked with a needle and we make some kind of involuntary movement.
We heard something, we thought about something, we have a plan in our head, and only after that we give out a certain behavior.
Again, we were taught to draw everyone.
But Picasso, Robins, are not all, it turns out a few.
Anyone can learn to draw, but not everyone will get the desired result.
What is this related to?
From Tolman's point of view, it is related to the presence of intermediate variables that exist.
A person really has thinking, a person really has cognitive processes that are characterized by a lot of characteristics.
Being a behaviorist, Tolman came from the fact that we will not get into this psyche.
We will just take into account the presence of these variables.
And he called these intermediate variables cognitive maps.
At the same time, Tolman meant the cognitive maps that are very similar to those maps that we can navigate in space.
If an animal is launched into a labyrinth, as Tolman did,
then the animal, passing through this labyrinth, will remember where to turn and where to go.
And when we launch this animal into the same labyrinth the next time, it will no longer wander aimlessly through the labyrinth.
It will already follow some scheme, some map.
Everything here is very similar to our human orientation on the map and the compass in the forest or in the field.
Tolman talks about cognitive maps as a certain conscious image that arises in the head of an animal person
and which we associate with the environment in which we are.
And then, thanks to this map, we can already navigate in this environment.
The intermediate variables have a principled impact on the behavior of the orc from the point of view of the applicability of the results.
What did the behaviorists do before Tolman?
They were, in fact, studying methods of trial and error.
I try certain forms of behavior and look at the results that I get.
Operational conditioning.
If the results suit me, I fix the behavior.
If the results do not suit me, it's a mistake.
I don't implement this behavior.
But these were real trials and errors.
By introducing intermediate variables and a cognitive map, Tolman made it possible to talk about latent learning or hidden learning.
And this is exactly the kind of learning that manifests itself both in humans and in higher animals.
Indeed, you can, with the help of behaviorism,
all behaviorism is directed to a specific real learning.
I form certain stimuli so that you get a new desired reaction.
That is, it all happens in real situations.
As for latent learning, the situation is different here.
At the beginning, we talked about a variety of variables that exist.
Dependent, independent, random, distorted.
All these variables still act.
Again, we emphasized that the fact of human behavior is associated with a huge number of circumstances that exist here.
These variables are still remembered by a person, still leave their mark on his behavior.
But they may not appear in action as a result of behavior now, they will appear later.
Any of us can remember a large number of our teachers who did not seem to give us useful knowledge from our point of view.
However, after a while, when we found ourselves in new circumstances,
when we found ourselves in new conditions, it suddenly turns out that what we were taught by one or another teacher,
who we did not go to lectures with at all, and who we did not want to see,
suddenly what he taught us and what we thought we did not know and forgot, turns out to be useful.
This is latent learning.
A person is arranged in such a way that he remembers a large amount of information.
And not all this information is immediately applicable in the activity.
The circumstances of life change, the circumstances of professional activity change,
the competencies that are required of us change.
And here, quite unexpectedly, suddenly, any skills, any schemes, any knowledge that we have,
but which we usually do not use, suddenly appear.
We use them as necessary.
This is what is called conscious and unconscious competence.
Tolmav, in particular, when talking about the cognitive map and latent learning,
talked about virtual trials and errors.
In order for us to develop the desired behavior, we do not necessarily need to make real trials and errors.
We can make them in our mind.
But again, an old example.
In order to understand that we do not need to stick our fingers into the outlet,
we do not need to put them in to get the electric current,
we can see how someone was hit, we can see the consequences.
And this is no longer our experience, this is the experience that we saw, this is a virtual experience.
But we took it into account and we are already in a normal state, in a normal state,
we will not stick two fingers into the outlet.
No matter how funny it is.
After Tolman, these methods of learning gained their independence and they began to pay great attention.
When it comes to organizational behavior,
then again, now, with many trainings, the same forms of training are used.
During the training, we get a lot of information that, from our point of view, may not be useful to us later.
However, by joining our everyday activities,
they provide the necessary help to us in terms of achieving this or that success.
This was the transition that behaviorist Tolman made from the point of view of behaviorism
to the camp of supporters of the cognitive approach.
And although Tolman himself remained in the behaviorist position until the end of his life,
and believed that interpersonal changes were no more than a way to facilitate the account of a large number of external factors,
his idea of cognitive maps, latent learning, virtual trials and errors was picked up and received further development.
Moreover, it received further development, again, far from the immediate cognitive approach.
It received further development in the same behavioral approach.
And in this case, we are approaching such a significant figure of the behavioral approach as Albert Bandura.
As for Albert Bandura, he was already engaged in non-animals.
Bandura considered the teaching of man.
He was interested in the fact of teaching man, although he considered it from a behavioral position.
And Bandura analyzed what these interpersonal changes that man has.
Moreover, Bandura noticed that, yes, indeed, if we take a person,
then operant conditioning is significantly manifested in him.
But where does a person get information about what consequences can be brought by one or another behavior?
Where does a person learn positive behavior, desirable, approved?
Where does a person learn what behavior is undesirable, undesirable, which should be avoided?
Where does this line between demonstrable, socially acceptable behavior and behavior that is undesirable, cross?
Bandura conducted research on children, on people, on adults.
Bandura conducted the study, unlike other bioherorists of the same topic, on people.
And the main idea of Bandura is that every person is unique.
For bioherorists, this is a very, well, let's say, very extraordinary idea.
Because bioherorists come from the fact that no matter what qualities people have,
I will build my stimuli in such a way that any person will behave in a desirable way.
And Bandura comes from another.
All people are individual.
And therefore, all people with different speeds, with different degrees of success, with different degrees of applicability,
master certain or other behavioral skills, and they develop behavior schemes in different ways.
How are they developed?
And Bandura draws attention to the fact that a person is a social being.
All human activity occurs in his interaction with other people.
These people do something.
I want to be equal to some people.
I want to be similar to some people.
I don't want to be similar to anyone and I will never imitate anyone.
And here Bandura introduces the basic principle of learning through observation.
No matter what kind of person we take, no matter what actions he is involved in,
a person always sees how other people behave.
A person pays attention to the fact that someone is more successful in terms of promotion in service,
in terms of obtaining the desired results, in terms of promotion.
Someone is less successful, although he may have a lot of different necessary knowledge,
he may have a lot of desired professional competencies, but he does not achieve the desired result.
And a person with less professional competence achieves a higher material level of payment,
a higher social status and is more appreciated.
And a person observes the behavior of other people.
At the same time, he observes the behavior of those people who, for example,
take the place that you want to take,
who, for example, came to work with you in the company at the same time,
only you, as a sales manager, you are still a sales manager.
And the one you came with is already the deputy director of the sales department.
What's the difference?
They studied in the same university, received the same diploma.
Moreover, you can consider that you know the subject no worse than he does.
And you begin to observe what behavior another person demonstrates
and what is the success of his behavior.
Again, the same operational conditioning.
You observe the behavior of another person,
the consequences of which allow him to achieve the desired result.
Therefore, if you strive to behave in a similar way,
we will leave the question of ethics aside now.
If you behave in a similar way,
then you also have a similar chance of achieving the desired result.
Bandura, of course, did not say anything new.
But the task is that in science, if you highlight a problem
and pay close attention to it,
new studies begin.
And Bandura did not conduct these studies.
Bandura simply showed in practice how these systems of learning through observation work.
And he showed it in socially significant situations.
For example, Bandura's experiments on training children to certain behavioral skills,
such as aggressiveness, were very well-known.
These experiments were very simple.
And Bandura put these experiments to show that the media that surround us every day
play a fundamental role in the development of any socially desirable, socially acceptable ways of human behavior.
There were three groups of children who watched a story
in which a certain behavior of a doll was demonstrated.
There was a big inflatable doll.
And in one story, the same child, the same age as the children,
beat this doll with a stick.
In all the stories, there was the same situation.
There was a big inflatable doll.
There was a child, the same age as the children, who beat this doll.
However, there were different results.
In one story, after the child beat this doll, he was punished.
And, accordingly, he was told that he was not behaving well.
In another story, after the child beat this doll, he was encouraged and told that he was doing the right thing.
And in the third story, there was no reaction.
The child simply beat this doll.
And then all the conclusions remained to be made by the children.
This experience was at first banal.
After that, it was repeatedly repeated.
And the results showed that those groups of children who saw the encouragement of aggression,
the encouragement of the child who beat the inflatable doll,
those groups of children began to demonstrate more aggression.
And this aggressive behavior began to appear more often in them.
In those groups that saw that these aggressive actions were punishable,
the children became less aggressive.
And in those groups where, accordingly, there was a neutral reaction,
the result was 50 to 50.
Some of the children began to repeat this behavior, some did not.
This experiment of Bandura was then repeated with children, adults, with different circumstances.
And it showed very well that the media have a significant influence on the formation of our behavior.
Again, these media can be used to develop socially acceptable forms of behavior,
cooperation, support, as well as to develop socially unacceptable forms of behavior,
competition, aggression, obstruction of someone's achievement of certain goals.
As for Bandura, he later developed his idea,
which is applicable to fears, to how certain TV programs affect human behavior.
But we are interested in the possibility of applying this method of Bandura to teach a person to require professional skills,
to what is called corporate ethics, corporate norms of behavior.
Based on his observations, Bandura came to the conclusion that if the organization
in one way or another demonstrates a desirable approach to work, behavior,
a desirable structure of relations, then a loyal relationship of the employee with the company will be formed,
the required behavior skills will be formed, a certain corporate culture will be formed,
this corporate culture will be broadcast to other people.
And accordingly, when a new person comes to the company, who sees in a certain way the promoted forms of behavior,
he will adapt faster to this company and become a member of the team faster.
Today we can say that these concepts of Bandura, which were considered,
found a wide application and a wide approach to modern organizational behavior.
Now, when a new employee is included in a team in large companies,
he gets acquainted with the history of the company, with its founders,
he gets acquainted with various documents of the company.
This is the formation of a person's required, desirable, approved corporate behavior,
his immersion in corporate culture and the development of corporate ethics.
As for the study of the means of observation, Bandura created a social cognitive theory.
Again, note that Bandura remains a behaviorist, and it comes from the fact that the main thing for us is the behavior of a person.
This behavior can be accelerated and made more productive, more effective,
if we, in addition to external stimulation, material competition, non-material stimulation,
training of employees, evaluation of employees.
If, in addition to this, we will also use some cognitive maps,
some cognitive processes that will show what is welcomed in a particular company.
So Bandura was the creator of a social cognitive theory.
The social one reflects the fact that a person lives among other people,
and a person's behavior is formed from the point of view of observing the behavior of others,
successful behavior of others, unsuccessful behavior of others,
and depending on what you want to achieve, how quickly you want to achieve it,
you will implement certain actions, certain methods, certain approaches,
which are implemented by a successful member of your team.
You should know who to rely on, and you should know what results to get and when.
This is a social component.
Cognitive component means that in order to achieve the desired reaction,
you achieve it with the help of your cognitive components,
with the help of your thinking, with the help of your observability,
with the help of those processes that you use to perform knowledge.
In this sense, Bandura highlights four variables that affect the learning through observation
and make this observation more successful.
The first variable is, of course, attention.
It all depends on whether you are really attentive and can identify
those or other components of the behavior of another component of the behavior of the model
in order to adopt them.
You can go to a certain suit, as the person who achieved success wears.
You can smoke the same cigars, you can wear the same rings,
you can use the same laptop or something else, but these are not determining factors.
Therefore, you should pay attention to some other characteristics
that make a person successful.
Responsibility, accuracy, pedanticism, scrupulousness.
Yes, of course, the suit is very important, but at the same time it is important what this suit is worn for.
The ability to identify those variables that need to be paid attention to,
those independent leading variables that you should practice,
this is a very important aspect of learning through observation.
The next variable that Bandura highlights is memory.
Or our mnemonic processes.
We must consciously remember the behavior that was successful
and we must remember those actions, gestures, facial expressions, looks that were successful,
that helped you to realize the desired form of behavior.
Finally, pay attention to who you need to spend more time with,
who you need to consult more often, who to cross, who not to cross,
who to defend your point of view from, who not to defend.
These are also factors of success, you all know this from your own experience.
So, the processes of behavior formation.
In this case, Bandura means what we have already discussed,
the technology of this behavior.
What Skinner also noticed.
Behavior is not formed just like that.
Behavior is realized through certain stages, through certain stages.
You don't need to strive to do everything at once, you need to do everything gradually and consistently.
Bandura points out this separately.
It constantly emphasizes the fact that if we talk about the process of behavior formation,
then it must be done in stages.
You don't need to strive to learn everything at once, it won't work.
And finally, the last important variable in terms of Bandura is the motivational processes.
This is a very interesting variable for behaviorism.
After all, if we return to Skinner, and especially to Watson,
then in this case we are talking about stimulus reactions.
At first, Tolma introduced intermediate variables, and thus introduced our thinking ability into behaviorism.
Bandura continues the same direction and introduces motivational processes.
Motivation is why a person does something.
What am I interested in getting any result?
Why do I want to achieve any success?
What does it lead to? What do we get in the end?
And by influencing this motivation, we are able to speed up the process,
get an effective result.
By getting this result, we achieve the goals that are set for us.
You can increase your salary.
But if the motivation of the employee does not change,
then no matter what salary you give him, he will not get more and better results.
His motivation remains the same.
If we start to overpay him for the successful work of the employee,
thereby we have a demotivating effect.
And, of course, observing that my colleagues are sitting at the same tables,
spend the same working hours, but for 8 hours they write letters to someone,
play games, do personal affairs.
Why would I try?
If they get the same money as I do, then the motive changes.
Bandura drew attention to this aspect from the point of view of organizational behavior,
from the point of view of pragmatics of using these approaches.
And after Bandura, a large number of trainings, behavioral trainings,
began to be built from the point of view of analysis of motives,
analysis of motivation schemes, material stimulation, non-material stimulation.
After all, as we noticed, Bandura very often spoke about non-material stimulation.
The same is true for the demonstration of successful activity.
It is not always material stimulation.
You never know what result it will lead to.
These are the variables that Bandura highlighted.
And, accordingly, these variables turned out to be operational
and a large number of trainings that are now being held in organizations
in order to develop good sales skills, presentation skills,
skills of working with objections, skills of working with a difficult client,
skills of working in a stressful state.
And the whole other set of training lists that are now presented on the training market,
they are just significantly built on these variables,
where it is highlighted what to focus on, what to remember,
how to form behavior in stages, and a very important aspect of motivation.
How do I build my motivation, the processes that are obtained,
in order to achieve the result that is before me faster.
All these aspects, in fact, represent the social cognitive theory
that Bandura formulated and which differs from other existing theories.
Bandura's theory is pragmatic.
If we take a scientific concept, there is a lot of theory, a lot of cognitive approaches.
But this is a scientific theory, yes, they are, of course, correct, yes, they are interesting.
But Bandura not only created a theory, he created a practically applicable, practically proven,
practically applicable theory that gives results.
In this case, the results that were in demand in business,
and the results on which modern training is built,
for which we, as the leaders of companies, pay, respectively,
those or other funds, and we spend them from the point of view of investment.
We invest funds in these trainings,
because then they will be called back to us by increasing our business performance.
So, what we have just considered is a behavioral concept.
Starting with Bandura, starting with Skinner,
a concept that is called radical behaviorism,
radical in the sense that it principally comes from the stimulus of reactions,
completely abandoning our psychological and cognitive abilities.
Then, with the efforts of the behaviorist Tolman,
the behaviorist Bandura, intermediate variables are introduced,
cognitive maps are introduced, our mental processes are introduced,
motivational processes are introduced,
and gradually, the transition from behavioral theories to cognitive,
to our own cognitive theories,
the essence and the task of which is to analyze the thinking abilities of a person.
When we talk about cognitive theories as such,
that is, our own cognitive theories,
then, of course, we must mention George Alexander Kelley,
who was the creator, and he created his concept in the 1950s,
and then he remained largely incomprehensible,
because the middle of the last century is the dawn of behaviorism.
Skinner, Tolman, Bandura are still the second half of the 20th century.
So, when Kelley, in the mid-1950s,
created his own cognitive theory,
which was called the cognitive theory of organizational behavior,
we will again consider it exclusively in our organizational context,
we will not consider it from the point of view of scientific concepts,
its pros and cons.
So, as for Kelley's theory,
Kelley acted as an opponent of behaviorism.
He supported all the arguments that were put forward against behaviorism.
And the main argument was that a person is fundamentally different from an animal.
Yes, of course, everything that we use to train rats, monkeys, pigeons,
can be applied to a person.
But a person is fundamentally different from all other animals.
Our mind, our mental abilities, our cognitive mechanisms.
And if we use only these cognitive mechanisms,
it will be more than enough not just for the formation of the necessary organizational behavior,
but for the change of this behavior,
for the radical change of this behavior and for the achievement of completely different results.
As I said, Kelley was a main figure in the middle of the last century.
And only by the end of the 20th century,
when the cognitive theory began to develop,
the cognitive approaches began to develop,
largely thanks to Bichiarist Tolman, Bichiarist Banduri,
Rotor, which also worked in the Bichiarist direction.
So, when cognitive concepts began to gradually come first in organizational behavior,
then Kelley was mentioned.
Indeed, a great deal of attention is paid to cognitive abilities of a person.
A person can be taught everything we want and do it quickly.
But to do it through the thinking of a person, through his cognitive apparatus.
Kelley came from the fact that any person can be considered as a naive researcher.
What do we do in our life when we study, when we meet someone, when we fill ourselves with bumps?
We form certain cognitive ideas about what is good, what is bad, what is useful, what is harmful,
what is socially demanded, what is socially unacceptable.
What is the choice that any of us makes when entering a higher educational institution?
It was a certain kind of rating, where it became clear from the point of view of social needs,
where we have more prospects for obtaining the desired result.
No wonder there is a great excess of economists, lawyers and psychologists.
This is what was considered to be in demand.
Therefore, relevant faculties were opened, people went to study,
and now they are in the labor market, not in demand.
And at the same time, there is a lack of engineers, technical specialists,
who also received further development, but these professions were not in demand at the time.
Therefore, the training of the necessary specialists was not carried out.
So, Kelly comes from the fact that any person can be considered as a naive researcher.
What is the introduction of a person into life?
The introduction of a person into life is a search and analysis of those situations,
those circumstances, which I can apply my activity to, and in which I can be successful.
A person looks at different behavioral patterns, at different behavioral models,
at different cognitive maps, what I need to do to get the desired result.
And then, having typed these cognitive maps, but typing them in the head, in the virtual image, in the virtual space,
naturally, if I enter the university, I have no experience yet, I cannot understand that after graduating from the law university,
will I become a successful lawyer or will I be, let's say, not quite a legal specialist in demand?
I still can't understand that.
But I already have a certain set of options in my head, that I can become a lawyer, an economist, a sociologist, a scientist, a businessman.
And, accordingly, I already begin to try those or other options on myself.
I have the possibility to choose from different options.
And this position is called constructive alternativism.
There are certain mental constructs that are present in my head.
And there are certain alternatives to which the implementation of these constructs, these thoughts, these ideas, these cognitive schemes,
the principal cognitive schemes, they are not yet in reality, they are only in our head.
There are certain alternatives to which these constructs can lead.
Therefore, I must make a choice, a choice of those mental constructs that are in my head.
Here is a simple but basic idea of Kelley.
We really observe and, based on observation, we form maps of reality, cognitive maps.
And then we choose which of these maps suits us and which of these maps we would like to follow.
At the same time, Kelley comes from the fact that the main cognitive mechanism of a person, the main cognitive education is a personal construct.
It is a dichotomy that comes from comparison and distinction.
There is some element, for example, salary.
And, accordingly, I can assess that if I become a lawyer I will get a high salary.
Accordingly, this is what I want to strive for, what I want to be like.
And there is another alternative.
I can become a teacher, a doctor, a budgetary, as it is called, and get a corresponding salary.
This is a difference.
Yes, I have to study for the same amount of time.
But in one case I get one salary that I want to get, and in another case I get another salary that I don't want.
A dichotomy and a distinction.
This is what a personal construct is.
It is a comparison of the element I want, of the approach I want, of what I want to achieve and of what I don't want.
I don't want to be equal to anything.
So, here is a bipolar construct.
There is always an element of similarity, which I want, and an element of distinction, which I don't want.
In this case, Kelly naturally comes from logic.
There is a desirable result, and there is an undesirable one.
This is black and white logic.
Of course, one can say that a person is not so easy to please.
But Kelly talked about this in the mid-1950s, and he was the first to build organizational behavior on these mental schemes.
Now, in the 21st century, one can, of course, highly relate to his approach, but nevertheless, he was the first.
The main postulate of Kelly's theory is very simple.
In general, Kelly came from the fact that the principles on which he built the organizational theory should be clear.
Just because a person chooses constructs that are clear to him, one can say a lot of beautiful words,
which will be clear only to scientists, and to others it will be unclear.
If I consider a person as a naive researcher, I use clear terms, without any doubts about the concepts that science loves to deal with.
The main postulate of Kelly is that the subject's activity, all his subsequent actions, are determined by the ways he predicts the events to come.
Each of us builds predictions, each of us builds his own goal, his own system, his own system of life vision, of seeing himself in a few years.
Depending on the goal I set for myself, I try to achieve it.
That means I have to build my behavior, my activity in order to achieve the desired goal.
Again, there is a lot of things we've talked about, about the programming of Skinner, Baldur, Tolman.
But Kelly emphasizes that all these predictions are made in a thoughtful way.
It's not necessary to build a wall.
We can look at what others do and build an acceptable behavior line for ourselves.
In common sense, it's like an old thesis that a smart person learns from other people's mistakes, and a non-smart person learns from his own mistakes.
It's right, but everyone wants to be smart and not make their own mistakes.
Moreover, Kelly emphasizes that a human existence is a principled cognitive process.
Non-behavior, as it's been stated since the times of Watson, Skinner, Tolman, and Baldur, is not behavior.
Yes, behavior is a cognitive process, and behavior can be judged by what a person does.
But all human activity is cognition.
Any person explores what's going on, gains experience, and focuses on the circumstances he's in.
How is this cognition done?
It's done by imagining or representing those or other events in our head.
We imagine the consequences that may occur.
We imagine the results, the desires that may arise.
And we build our activity according to the desires or non-desires of those events.
Only by analyzing and predicting what we're doing in our head, we build our behavior.
The next important thing that Kelly says is that constructs don't exist by themselves.
We've talked about this a lot at the beginning, about scientific knowledge and methodological research.
There are no separate ideas.
All our personal constructs are interconnected.
They are based on our experience, ideas, successes, and failures.
These constructs are what we've gained as a result of our life, our achievements.
And they complement each other.
It's a kind of interconnected network.
If a person is healthy, his constructs flow out of each other.
If the constructs are separated, it's a sign of psychological disorders.
Psychiatrists often face this problem.
But I hope we shouldn't discuss it.
Again, when talking about constructs, Kelly emphasizes that this network is gained by a person as a result of his active cognitive activity.
A person is not a passive tool of influence.
It's not a black box that was influenced by a stimulus and it gave a reaction.
A person receives stimuli, analyzes, processes, predicts, evaluates, and then produces a result.
Only after he actively worked on them.
He tried something, got something and gave a reaction.
Kelly emphasizes that every personal construct is nothing more than a hypothesis.
A person makes assumptions, a prediction about how successful his actions or behavior will be.
A person thinks, why should I spend time to study MBA?
What else do I need? What can I learn?
When I can give a forum to anyone.
A person makes a hypothesis.
These hypotheses may seem right or not.
If a person makes a hypothesis that as he gains new knowledge, new systems, new skills,
he becomes more successful, it makes a progress in his business,
and he achieves a better result,
and yes, he will spend a lot of time after work to gain new knowledge,
but then all this will be spent, it's one thing.
I can formulate another hypothesis.
What will I learn?
I already have two or three higher education.
Why should I spend time?
This is also a hypothesis.
And the investigation will be made from it.
And I will organize my behavior according to the hypotheses I make.
In this case, the problem of correct formulation of a hypothesis arises.
The most significant components are identified.
The correct variables are identified.
In this case, speaking about the KELY concept,
we return to the scientific methods of research.
Yes, any person, a naive researcher,
but a naive research is a reflection of the points that are specifically specified in a scientific research.
We are all researchers in this life.
We all gain experience from our mistakes,
we all gain experience from observations,
we all make our plans and we get certain hypotheses.
How successful these hypotheses will be,
it will be based on the results we get.
This is what concerns the cognitive approach in organizational behavior.
These are the directions that are widely used today,
including a large number of trainings.
They were called cognitive trainings,
which are not aimed at developing skills,
like bifurcation trainings,
but are aimed at teaching a person to mentally,
cognitively model successful forms of behavior
and to learn to behave like a successful model,
the model you chose yourself.
Unlike behavioral trainings,
the result may not come out quickly.
In behavioral training, I clearly know what result should be obtained,
and I know how to bring you to this result quickly.
This is about constructive alternative.
You choose a model that will be useful to you from your point of view,
and you go to this model.
Your hypothesis may seem wrong,
and this model will not lead to the desired result.
But only you can figure it out,
only you can get it
after you take some steps to get this result.
It does not mean that you should constantly go in the chosen direction.
You should be flexible.
You should get feedback and change your behavior
depending on the results you get.
This is where this very interesting and interesting connection
of behavioral and cognitive approach comes in.
In the end, all our personal constructs,
all our plans and behavior patterns,
lead to a certain behavior.
Plans are for us.
Others look at our results, at what we do.
And, of course, if we formulate something in our heads,
we need to get a certain result.
The result that will please us first,
and secondly, others,
because it is others who will evaluate this result.
This is how the connection of cognitive and behavioral theories is formed.